SDK-2342 Explain Releases vs Customization types (#1799)
spryker/spryker-docs: docs/sdk/dev/releases-vs-customization-types.md

---
title: Explain Releases vs Customization types

> description: Explain Spryker Corer release types and how different project development strategies are affected by each of them.

Reviewer: yes

### Private API customization
Spryker generally allows changing private APIs and core code. However in this case, part of the upgrade responsibilities move to the side of the customer.

What is a Private API?

A [Private API](https://docs.spryker.com/docs/scos/dev/architecture/module-api/declaration-of-module-apis-public-and-private.html#private-api) in SCOS is everything that is not a [Public API](https://docs.spryker.com/docs/scos/dev/architecture/module-api/declaration-of-module-apis-public-and-private.html#public-api). For example, it can be a _Business model_, or any file in the _Persistence_ layer, except for _QueryContainer_.

## Project customization and release types in terms of upgradability

This section explains how different project customizations affect upgradability for each release type.

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th rowspan="2">Customization type</th>
            <th colspan="3">Release Type</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>Patch Release</th>
            <th>Minor Release</th>
            <th>Major Release</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>Module configuration customization</td>

>             <td>:plus:</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <td>:heavy_plus_sign:</td>
```

>             <td>:plus:</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <td>:heavy_plus_sign:</td>
```

>             <td>:minus:</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <td>:heavy_minus_sign:</td>
```

        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Plug and Play customization</td>

>             <td>:plus:</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <td>:heavy_plus_sign:</td>
```

            <td>:warning:</td>

>             <td>:minus:</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <td>:heavy_minus_sign:</td>
```

        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Module customization</td>

>             <td>:plus:</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <td>:heavy_plus_sign:</td>
```

            <td>:warning:</td>

>             <td>:minus:</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            <td>:heavy_minus_sign:</td>
```

        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

> 

Author: The table needs colspans and rowspans. Please suggest how to do this in markdown - I found no other way to do this but use the HTML table.

> 

Reviewer 2: If there is no other way to do this but HTML, then HTML can work - it is just preferred to use markdown in the future.

> :plus: Customization doesn’t affect the upgradability process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:heavy_plus_sign: Customization doesn’t affect the upgradability process.
```

:warning: Customization may affect the upgradability process, cause some issues, and sometimes requires review.

> :minus: Customization heavily affects upgradability and requires review and manual changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:heavy_minus_sign: Customization heavily affects upgradability and requires review and manual changes.
```

- If `CustomDiscountAmountCalculatorPlugin` extends core `DiscountCalculatorPlugin` which does not exist anymore. The code will fail.
- The `DiscountAmountCalculatorPlugin` was added to the end because the Upgrader couldn’t find the removed plugin in the stack so it didn’t replace it.
- Discount is calculated two times.

As a result, `getOrderCalculatorPluginStack` must be adjusted manually in order to fix issues.

### Private API customization and how it affects upgradability

Let’s check this with the `Acme` module example and its releases.

A core module named `Acme` is provided as a `spryker/acme` package with version 1.0.0. For instance, it contains `AcmeReader`.

```php
class AcmeReader implements AcmeReaderInterface
{   
    public function readAcme(AcmeCriteriaTransfer $acmeCriteriaTransfer): AcmeTransfer
    {
        $acmeTransfer = $this->acmeRepository->findAcmeById($acmeCriteriaTransfer->getId());
        
        $fooTransfer = $this->fooFacade->findFooByAcme($acmeCriteriaTransfer->getId());
        $acmeTransfer->setFoo($fooTransfer);
        
        return $this->acmExpander->expand($acmeTransfer);   
    }
    
}
```

> And let’s say for some reason, the customer wants to customize `AcmeReader`. For example, some extra logic execution is added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And let’s say for some reason, the customer wants to customize `AcmeReader`, or example,  by adding extra logic execution.
```

```php
class AcmeReader extends SprykerAcmeReader
{
    public function readAcme(AcmeCriteriaTransfer $acmeCriteriaTransfer): AcmeTransfer
    {
        $acmeTransfer = $this->acmeRepository->findAcmeById($acmeCriteriaTransfer->getId());
        
        $fooTransfer = $this->fooFacade->findFooByAcme($acmeCriteriaTransfer->getId());
        $acmeTransfer->setFoo($fooTransfer);
        
        $this->callBeforeExpand($acmeTransfer);
        
        $this->acmeExpander->expand($acmeTransfer);
        
        return $acmeTransfer;
    }
    
    protected function callBeforeExpand(AcmeTransfer $acmeTransfer): void
    {
        // Do something
    }
}
```

> Now, let’s imagine Spryker released new versions of `spryker/acme` package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, let’s imagine Spryker released new versions of the `spryker/acme` package.
```

#### Patch release (e.g., 1.0.0 to 1.0.1).

> In version 1.0.1 was fixed a typo in the variables. So this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The patch release, for example from 1.0.0 to 1.0.1, fixed a typo in the variables.
```

```php
return $this->acmExpander->expand($acmeTransfer);
```

is changed to this

```php
return $this->acmeExpander->expand($acmeTransfer);
```

> As you can see, it doesn’t affect custom code and everything works fine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see, this doesn’t affect custom code and everything works fine.
```

> #### Minor release (e.g., 1.0.0 to 1.1.0)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Minor release
```

> In version 1.1.0 Spryker replaces the method it uses from the `FooFacade`, the method `findFooByAcme(int $id)` is marked as deprecated, instead providing a new method `findFooByCriteria(FooCriteriaTransfer $fooCriteriaTransfer)` with the more generic functionality. The `AcmeReader` also changed and now it looks like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, the minor release 1.0.0 to 1.1.0 has Spryker replace the method it uses from `FooFacade`. The method `findFooByAcme(int $id)` is marked as deprecated, and a new method `findFooByCriteria(FooCriteriaTransfer $fooCriteriaTransfer)` is provided, with more generic functionality. The `AcmeReader` also changed and now it looks like this:
```

```php
public function readAcme(AcmeCriteriaTransfer $acmeCriteriaTransfer): AcmeTransfer
{
    $acmeTransfer = $this->acmeRepository->findAcmeById($acmeCriteriaTransfer->getId());
    
    $fooCriteriaTransfer = (new FooCriteriaTransfer())
        ->setAcmeId($acmeCriteriaTransfer->getId();
    $fooTransfer = $this->fooFacade->findFooByCriteria($fooCriteriaTransfer);
    $acmeTransfer->setFoo($fooTransfer);
    
    return $this->acmExpander->expand($acmeTransfer);   
}
```

Does this break customized logic? The answer is no. The project code continues to work just fine using the deprecated external facade method, while it might miss some performance improvements potentially brought by the new method.

#### Major release (e.g., 1.0.0 to 2.0.0)

> In major version 2.0.0, the deprecated method `FooFacade::findFooByAcme(int $id)` is completely removed. The upgrader tool will update the `spryker/acme` and `spryker/foo` packages to the latest version, now project code throws `Error` exception and breaks the application because the old method does not exist anymore. This means the developer needs to manually fix this issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the major version  release 1.0.0 to 2.0.0, the deprecated method `FooFacade::findFooByAcme(int $id)` is completely removed. The upgrader tool will update the `spryker/acme` and `spryker/foo` packages to the latest version. Because of this, the project's code now throws an `Error` exception and breaks the application because the old method does not exist anymore. This means you need to manually fix this issue.
```
